Clarify where the repo map metadata is used (#99)
uptane/uptane-standard: uptane-standard.md

Repository mapping metadata informs a primary ECU about which repositories to trust for images or image paths. Repository mapping metadata MUST be present on all primary ECUs, and MUST contain the following information:

> * A list of repository names, each with one or more URLs at which the repository can be accessed.  The first repository name in this list SHALL be known as the Director repository.

Reviewer: It's a good question.

There are two things at issue here:
1. Should we identify a single Director repository? (IMO, yes)
2. How should we indicate which repository is the Director repository?

**1 is the important question, IMO**, and I tried to get at the rationale for it in [my comment before I made the edits](https://github.com/uptane/uptane-standard/pull/99#issuecomment-484272174), but I'll explain more of my thinking here after tackling 2.

**On question 2**, the notion of making the Director the first in the list was a simplification we could go back and forth on.  It seems cleaner than adding a boolean for each repository indicating Director-ness, and then adding checks in the procedures that require clients to make sure that this property is maintained ("Make sure that one of the repositories listed in the mapping metadata is flagged as a Director repository" or "Make sure that only one..." etc.).  It seems better to establish that the client will expect that it's the first, than to add a bunch of procedural requirements for the clients allowing one more sneaky way metadata can be invalid.  Ira mentioned that he found it preferable, if that's helpful.  If there are better alternatives, great -- just try to prefer simplicity as long as it doesn't constrain implementations much.  (This didn't feel like it did....) 

**More of my thinking on question 1:**
There are different responsibilities that the design assigned to the Director.  Some of these responsibilities work pretty cleanly if we have multiple repositories performing them (ECU identifier limiting, filtering out updates, etc.), and some of them really don't (sole source of Targets metadata to partial verification ECUs, providing and rotating the Timeserver key etc.).  So my thought was to allow things like ECU identifiers in repositories other than "the" Director (hence [this exchange](https://github.com/uptane/uptane-standard/pull/99#discussion_r277099490)), and to isolate the unique properties so that they always come from a single Director repository, and that we just allow other repositories to perform the other responsibilities if an implementer needs that arrangement.  I think it's harder for the procedures in the standard to try to allow for multiple full-fledged Directors.

For example, with the current added here, you can add a repository that serves as a sort of fleet manager that includes ECU IDs and lists all the updates for all the ECUs it wants to permit to a particular vehicle in its top-level Targets metadata, much like a Director.  But we can only provide one Targets role to a partial verification client, and only one repository really needs to handle Timeserver keys (assuming the Timeserver is implemented) so that suggests that one repository should be special: the Director.

> * A list of repository names, each with one or more URLs at which the repository can be accessed.  The first repository name in this list SHALL be known as the Director repository.

Author: Yes, exactly: for these reasons, this PR didn't turn out to be as simple as expected, though it's good to clear these things.

* A list of mappings of image paths to repositories.  Each mapping MUST contain:
    * A list of image paths. Image paths MAY be expressed using wildcards, or by enumerating a list, or a combination of the two.

>     * A list of repositories (at least two) that MAY sign the targets metadata for the image paths.  The first must always be the Director repository (the same repository that is listed first in the list of repository names).

Reviewer 2: Is this: 'The first must always be the Director repository' a MUST?

Reviewer 2: Also, does at least one repository have to sign the targets metadata?

Reviewer: @mnm678 , @iramcdonald:
It is intended as a MUST, yes, and I should fix the casing.  While we're on this, though, one could argue that this is too particular a requirement.  That would be helpful feedback.  The requirement for the procedure written here is that there must be one repository that will be regarded as the Director, and that it is defined at the level of the mapping metadata (not individual mappings).  I could instead not define how the client knows which repo is the Director repository.  Is that too loose?  Thoughts?

>     * A list of repositories (at least two) that MAY sign the targets metadata for the image paths.  The first must always be the Director repository (the same repository that is listed first in the list of repository names).

Reviewer: https://github.com/uptane/uptane-standard/pull/99#discussion_r277347053

    * A Boolean "terminating" flag which indicates whether the client MUST NOT continue searching subsequent mappings (after failing to find the requested image from at least one of the repositories specified in this mapping, and given that this mapping matches the request image).

>     * A threshold which indicates the minimum number of repositories that MUST sign off the same non-custom targets metadata on any matching image.  This threshold MUST be at least two, and SHOULD be equal to the number of repositories listed in this mapping.

Reviewer: I explained the rationale around the SHOULD in the thread before adding the commits:
https://github.com/uptane/uptane-standard/pull/99#issuecomment-484272174

As for which repositories are included, the text states explicitly that it is all of the repositories listed in the mapping (that is all of the repositories expected to speak to these image paths).

Does that clear things up?

>     * A threshold which indicates the minimum number of repositories that MUST sign off the same non-custom targets metadata on any matching image.  This threshold MUST be at least two, and SHOULD be equal to the number of repositories listed in this mapping.

Author: ```suggestion
    * A threshold which indicates the minimum number of repositories that MUST sign off the same non-custom targets metadata on any matching image.  This threshold MUST be at least two (with at least one Director repository), and SHOULD be equal to the number of repositories listed in this mapping.
```

For example, in the most basic Uptane case, the repository mapping metadata would contain:

* The name and URLs of the Director repository
* The name and URLs of the Image repository
* A single terminating mapping indicating that all images (`*`) MUST be signed by both the Director and Image repository (i.e., a threshold of 2 of 2 repositories)

However, more complex repository mapping metadata can permit more complicated use cases. For example:

> * A third repository might be useful for fleet management of after-market vehicles, such as a rental car company that might wish to only install approved updates.

Reviewer: I would leave actually calling additional repositories "directors" for the deployment considerations.  It creates the possibility of confusion here, where it has otherwise (I hope!) been very clear that there is one Director repository.  (See other comments)

> * A third repository might be useful for fleet management of after-market vehicles, such as a rental car company that might wish to only install approved updates.

Author: I think we have made it as clear as possible, we should be ok.

### Director Repository {#director_repository}

> The first repository name listed in the repository mapping metadata {{repo_mapping_meta}} is to be known as the Director repository.

Author: Yeah, I'm not sure I like this convention, would break backwards-compatibility for existing implementations.

Reviewer: This is the standard.  There was no policy previously, so I'm not sure what we'd be trying to be backwards-compatible with.  I don't think other implementations use the mapping metadata, and if they do, I don't know what procedure they'd have been following.  No matter how we define this, it's going to be different from someone's speculative interpretation.

Full verification of metadata means that the ECU checks that the Targets metadata about images from the Director repository matches the Targets metadata about the same images from the Image repository. This provides resilience to a key compromise in the system.

> Full verification MAY be performed by either primary or secondary ECUs.  Note that secondary ECUs receive their metadata from the primary instead of downloading it directly. In the following instructions, whenever an ECU is directed to download metadata, primary ECUs are to download it from the repositories, and secondary ECUs are to either request it from the primary ECU or refer to the cache of metadata already provided by the primary ECU.

Author: ```suggestion
Full verification MAY be performed by either primary or secondary ECUs.  Note that secondary ECUs receive their metadata from the primary instead of downloading it directly. In the following instructions, whenever an ECU is directed to download metadata, primary ECUs are to download it from the repositories, and secondary ECUs are to either request it from the primary ECU, or refer to its cache of metadata previously downloaded from the primary ECU.
```

If {{TAP-5}} is supported, a primary ECU SHALL download metadata and images following the rules specified in that TAP.  If {{TAP-5}} is not supported, the download should follow the {{TUF-spec}} and the metadata file renaming rules specified in {{metadata_filename_rules}}.

In order to perform full verification, an ECU SHALL perform the following steps:

> 

Reviewer 3: This line about the release counter has been removed without replacement. Is it redundant with the similar line in the "Verify image" section, or is it still worth mentioning here?

Author: Added to text.

1. Load the repository mapping metadata ({{repo_mapping_meta}}).
2. Load the latest verified time from the time server, if implemented.

> 3. Refresh the top-level metadata for the Director repository, by following the steps in {#refresh_toplevel_metadata}, for the first repository in the list of repositories in the mapping metadata.

Author: Again, objection to "the" Director repository being the first.

Reviewer: https://github.com/uptane/uptane-standard/pull/99#discussion_r277347053

> 4. If this ECU is a primary ECU, then iterate through the image metadata listed in the Director repository's top-level Targets metadata, and **store** all image metadata.  The primary ECU SHOULD also ensure that the image metadata from the director repository doesn't contain any ECU identifiers for ECUs not actually present in the vehicle.

Author: What does "**store** all image metadata" mean?

Reviewer: I think it's clear which metadata is intended, right? (If not, LMK!)  So the question is just what does storing it mean.  I wondered if this would be clear....

The operations on this metadata all refer to this metadata as "**stored** metadata" in bold, mostly for editors.  As we iterate through the repositories in the mapping, we note what each repository lists as the appropriate image metadata for a given image (whether it comes from the top-level Targets role of the Director or some delegated role in some image repository).  Once we have all of those, we compare them to each other, and discard them if they don't match in the appropriate ways, or return them if they do.

The point of noting these as "stored metadata" here is just to keep clear what bundle we're talking about.  For example, we are not comparing all top-level Targets metadata from all repositories, and we are not discarding the metadata roles from the repositories if this comparison fails.

How that is actually done does not matter to us at this level, I think.

So is the intention clear enough, does it seem correct, and do you think the text should be altered to make it clearer?

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure the boldface is helping here; in my opinion it just makes it a bit confusing why the word "store" is so important.

Also, "doesn't" -> "does not" for maximum formality. :)

> 5. If instead this ECU is a secondary ECU, then iterate through the image metadata listed in the Director repository's top-level Targets metadata, and **store** the first image metadata listed that includes this secondary ECU's ECU identifier and hardware ID.

Author: Why the first image metadata? I know this is to ignore duplicates, but still might be good to clarify. Also, where to store this image metadata?

Reviewer: Now that you ask that, it occurs to me that we don't require this list to be ordered (and indeed shouldn't IMO).  The intention I had when I wrote "first" there was to keep things deterministic in case of duplicates (which may have, say, different versions of the image with different hardware IDs or release counters, etc.).

But that kind of management should probably be left to the implementer.  So -- I'm for removing "first" and otherwise leaving it as is, I think.  If anyone has any other opinions....?

> 6. For each image name for which the previous two steps **stored** image metadata, obtain verified image metadata for that image by iterating over each mapping in the repository mapping metadata, in order, and performing the following steps for each mapping:

Reviewer 3: "For each image name" places an unnecessary emphasis on the name. I think the first clause could be written better as "For each image for which image metadata was stored in the previous two steps".

    1. If the image name does not match the image paths listed in the mapping, skip to the next mapping.
    2. For each repository listed in this mapping, if top-level metadata has not been refreshed for that repository using {#refresh_toplevel_metadata} in this iteration of the {#full_verification} procedure, refresh top-level metadata for that repository using the steps in {#refresh_toplevel_metadata}.

>     3. For each repository listed in this mapping, perform the procedure in {{resolve_delegations}}, beginning at the top-level Targets metadata in that repository, to find metadata for the image if it exists, and **store** it if it does.

Reviewer 3: Should probably mention that there are no delegations to resolve for the Director.

>     4. Find the first set of at least the mapping's threshold number of repositories, including the Director repository, for which all of the following is true for the stored image metadata for each repository:

Author: I find this very hard to parse on first read: "Find the first set of at least the mapping's threshold number of repositories"

Reviewer: Yeah, that might be a hard parse....
If the matching conditions didn't immediately follow, I might suggest "of at least X" followed later by "where X is...".   I'll try something else.

Reviewer: Is this any better?

```
4. Find the first set of at least X repositories -- where X is the mapping's
threshold, and such that the Director repository is in the set -- for which all
of the following is true for the stored image metadata for each repository:
```

(While I was at it, I realized that the "including the Director repository" bit could be misinterpreted, so I clarified that, too.)  It still reads a bit complex..... Hm.

        1. The non-custom Targets metadata (i.e., length and hashes) of the unencrypted image are the same.
        2. If listed, the "MUST match" custom Targets metadata (e.g., hardware identifier and release counter) are the same.

>         3. Any ECU identifiers, if listed, are the same.

Author: ECU identifiers are not supposed to be contained in Image repositories, no?

Reviewer: Wherever an ECU identifier is listed, it should be the same.  If two repositories specify it (say the Director and a sort of secondary director acting as a fleet manager), they should match.  Repositories that don't list an ECU identifier it need not match it.  Can you suggest an alternative phrasing for 3?

Reviewer 4: I would add and "if" ...."If ECU identifiers are listed, they are the same in both repositories."

Reviewer: Does this work?
 ```3. The ECU identifier is either not listed or the same across repositories.```

Reviewer: > What about, There either is no ECI identifier listed or the listed
> identifier is the same across repositories.

Sure, will add that.

>     5. If there is no such set (of at least the mapping's threshold number of repositories meeting the criteria in the prior step), then check the terminating property on this mapping.  If the terminating value for this mapping is true, then abort the search for image metadata for this image, discarding metadata **stored** for this image, as there is no verifiable update for it, and proceed to the next image for which there is **stored** image metadata, if any.  If the terminating value for this mapping is false, continue the search for verified image metadata for this image by continuing to the next mapping, discarding the image metadata for this image from the repositories other than the Director repository.

Reviewer: In order to maintain the semantics of the mapping order in the face of man-in-the-middle attacks that interfere with the obtaining metadata for a prior mapping, it may be necessary to also abort the search if ANY of the repositories in a prior mapping provide metadata for an image, even if the mapping is not terminating.  If anyone has thoughts, please LMK, but this is probably fine.

Reviewer 2: I think this step works as is.

Reviewer 3: I'm confused why "discarding the image metadata for this image from the repositories other than the Director repository." is necessary. If there are 4 repositories, the threshold is 3, and an image's metadata is available in repos 1, 2, and 4, then this would cause that case to fail, but I think it should succeed.

Reviewer: IIUC, no.  Those are the instructions for jumping to the next mapping, once a mapping's threshold has already failed to be met (`If there is no such set (of at least the mapping's threshold number of repositories meeting the criteria in the prior step`...).  So imagine:
- mapping 1, not terminating, all images: repos Director, R2, R3, and R4 must agree (threshold 3, must include Director)
- mapping 2 (details unimportant)

While processing mapping 1, you reach that instruction to discard image metadata once the 3/4 threshold for mapping 1 has already failed to be met (after you've checked Director, R2, R3, and R4).  At that point, you keep the image metadata (hashes, length, custom) for the image from the Director repo, but not from R2, R3, and R4.  You then move on to mapping 2, because mapping 1 was not terminating.  The image metadata for the Director is the same and still must match.

It looks like this may be too confusing.  I'm looking through Jon's changes.  Hopefully things will be simpler there.

> 7. The image metadata **stored** for each image is now verified.

Author: I don't like calling it the "image metadata", although I know saying "targets metadata for this image" is clunkier. Do we call it as such elsewhere?

Reviewer: Yes, the [hashes, length, custom metadata, etc.] that describes an image is called image metadata in many places elsewhere in the standard.  "targets metadata for this image", in addition to being a little clunkier, might suggest a full targets role on quick read.  I'm fine with whatever's clearest and most consistent across the document -- my current take is that that's "image metadata".

Reviewer: This might merit a nice, clear definition somewhere and then a check through the document to make sure that it's called "image metadata" consistently.  (If that's what we agree on....)

Reviewer 3: Is this line even necessary? It's ambiguous: does it mean the image metadata has been verified by the time you reach this step, or does it mean it's up to the implementation to verify it as part of step 7?

Reviewer: It was intended to describe that state of things by the time you reach that step.  You're right: it fails at helping to clear things up.  If we think that clarification is helpful, something like `Following the prior steps results in ... ` would probably work better.

Author: Removed from text.

In order to perform full verification, an ECU SHALL perform the following steps:

1. Load the repository mapping metadata ({{repo_mapping_meta}}).
2. Check each mapping, in the listed order, and identify the first mapping that matches the requested image.
3. Once a mapping is identified for the requested file, metadata is downloaded and verified from the assigned repositories listed in the mapping. To do so, an ECU SHALL perform the following steps:
    1. Load the latest attested time from the time server, if implemented.
    2. Download and check the Root metadata file from the repository, following the procedure in {{check_root}}.
    3. Download and check the Timestamp metadata file from the repository, following the procedure in {{check_timestamp}}.
    4. Download and check the Snapshot metadata file from the repository, following the procedure in {{check_snapshot}}.
    5. Download and check the top-level Targets metadata file from the repository, following the procedure in {{check_targets}}.

>     6. If necessary, locate and download a Targets metadata file from the repository that contains an image with with the given file name, following the procedure in {{resolve_delegations}}. (This SHOULD NOT be necessary to perform on a Director repository, as its top-level Targets metadata SHOULD NOT have delegations.) Also, check that the release counter for the image in the custom targets metadata in the previous targets metadata file is less than or equal to the release counter in this targets metadata file.

Reviewer 5: No need for a SHOULD here; Director targets metadata MUST NOT have delegations. This is important for the promises we make about partial verification secondaries.

> 4. If the targets metadata is a match across the specified threshold of repositories, return this metadata. A match means that:

Reviewer 5: I think this is now insufficiently specified. We still need to say that the image metadata that must be checked for matches is the union of all metadata from Director repositories, for example.

Also, in the multi-repository case, just using thresholds is not sufficient: we need to make sure that the target appears in at least one Image repository (i.e., something with an offline key).

Author: This is more of a Deployment Considerations thing, not really the Implementation Standard, but I'll note it anyway.

    1. The non-custom metadata (i.e., length and hashes) of the unencrypted image are the same in all sets of metadata.

>     2. The "MUST match" custom metadata (e.g., hardware identifier and release counter) are the same in all sets of metadata.

Reviewer 5: In the multi-director case, there's a new wrinkle: the ECU identifier MUST be the same across all Director repositories.

Reviewer 5: (And ECU identifier cannot be in must-match metadata, because it doesn't exist on image repositories.)

5. If the metadata is not a match, or if fewer than the threshold of repositories signed metadata about the desired target, then the client should take one of the following actions:
    5.1. If the terminating flag is set to true, report that either the repositories do not agree on the target, or that none of them have signed for the target.
    5.2. Otherwise, go back to step 2 and process the next mapping that matches the requested file.

> A primary ECU MUST verify that Targets metadata from the Director and Image repositories match. A secondary ECU MAY elect to perform this check only on the metadata for the image it will install. (That is, the target metadata from the Director that contains the ECU identifier of the current ECU.)

Reviewer 5: This paragraph only talks about the 2-repo case.

Author: Not really: that's why I said "repositories," but I'll make it clearer.
